Mandi, Himachal Pradesh
X----XX----XX----XX----XX----XX----XX----XX----XX----XX----XX----XX----XX----XX----XX----X

Origin of name
The name "mandi"  has its roots from Great Sage Rishi 'Mandav' who prayed in this area, and the rocks turned black due to the severity of his penance. Alternatively, the name may have been derived from the common word mandi which means "market" in Hindi. It may possibly be connected with the Sanskrit root mandaptika, meaning "an open hall or shed,".

History
The present District of Mandi was formed with the merger of two princely states, Mandi State and Suket State, on 15 April 1948, when the State of Himachal Pradesh was established. Until the mid 20th century, Mandi was on the trade route between Yarkant County and Ladakh to Hoshiarpur and the Indian plains, served as commercial hub and trade centre.

Historical events
Princely state of Mandi was founded by Bahu Sen in 1200 AD. But Ajbar Sen was the one who founded historical city of Mandi in 1526 AD. The Chiefs of Mandi State are said to be the descendants of common ancestors of the Chandervanshi line of rajputs of Sen dynasty of Bengal who claim to be the descendants of Pandavas of Mahabharata times. The present District of Mandi was formed with the merger of two princely states Mandi State and Suket  on 15 April 1948, when the State of Himachal Pradesh was established. Ajbar Sen assassinated Mandi, it led to beginning of modern period of Mandi history. Old Mandi capital was abandoned and the site of present capital was acquired. Some historians put the selection of present capital in the year 1527 AD. The idol of Madho Rai, the presiding deity of Mandi and incarnation of Lord Vishnu is said to be made by Goldsmith Bhima, in 1648. Maharaja Ranjit Singh occupied Mandi in 1839 but Ranjit Singh died on 27 June 1839.
It was beginning of disintegration of Sikh powers in the hills and British power emerged as most powerful. In 1849, Princely states of Mandi, Suket and Chamba were put under the control of Superintendent 'Cis-Satluj States'. Lala Lajpat Rai visited Mandi during 1906 to organize the revolutionary activities. Revolt occurred in Mandi State against the repressive, corrupt and arrogant administration of Raja Bhawani Sen and his Wazir Jiwa Nand Paddha. This revolt was led by Shobha Ram in 1909. A Prominent revolutionary of Mandi, Hardev Ram joined revolutionary band of patriots in 1913. He went to Shanghai, America and Japan where he met Lala Hardayal and Dr. Mathura Singh. Another revolutionary of Mandi Bhai Hirda Ram started participating in revolutionary activities in 1914. He joined Ras Behari Bose,Sant Baba Wasakha Singh Dadehar, Mathura Singh, Kartar Singh Sarba, Bhai Parma Nand and Pingle. In 1915, on the request of Sarla Devi, wife of Bhai Hirda Ram, the Viceroy converted his death sentence into life imprisonment. In the same year, Nagchala Dacoity in Mandi state took place. In Mandi conspiracy case, Mandi revolutionary Sidhu Kharara was sentenced for seven years in 1917. Mandi Legislative Council was constituted in 1933. Swami Purna Nand of Mandi was elected as president of "Himalayan Hill states regional Council"  & Pt. Padam Dev became its general secretary. The session of "Himalayan Hill states regional Council" was held at Mandi from 8 March 1946 to 10 March 1946. It was also attended by INA activists Dhillon, Sehgal and Shahnawaj. So finally, Mandi came into existence on 15 April 1948. Suraj Sen ruled over Mandi at time of Damdama Mahal of Mandi.

Before independence
The Chiefs of Mandi State are said to be the descendants of common ancestors of the Chandervanshi line of rajputs of Sen dynasty of Bengal who claim to be the descendants of Pandavas of Mahabharata times. According to the earlier accounts, Bahu Sen established an independent territory and was recognized as a Rana or local Chief. The Raja Ajber Sen, the nineteenth descendent from Bahu Sen, was considered as an able and benevolent ruler. He founded the present Mandi city around the ‘Bhootnath Temple’ in 
the early 16th century  and shifted his capital to this place from Purani Mandi. The temple of Trilokinath was also constructed during his reign. He was succeeded by Chhattar Sen who built a fort in Kalar by name Lakargarh. The successive rulers of Mandi were Shyam Sen, Gaur Sen, Sidh Sen, Shamsher Sen, Surma Sen, Ishwari Sen, Jalam Sen, Balbir Sen and Vijay Sen. Many public utility, services and facilities like schools, hospitals and post offices, etc., were started by Raja Vijay Sen during his time. He also built large number of palaces and houses. A Mule road from Baijnath in District Kangra to Sultanpur in adjoining District of Kullu, via Mandi and the Victoria suspension Bridge on river Beas were constructed during his time in the year 1877. Raja Vijay Sen was issue less and left no direct heir. 
So in 1897, Bhawani Sen was recognized as his successor. During his period the city was considerably damaged in the earthquake of 1905. He was succeeded by Joginder Sen in April 1914 who was, however, vested with full powers of ruling chief in February 1925. During the period of his minority, Mandi remained under the management of a British Officer and a number of departments were overhauled and reorganised. Mandi being one of the oldest city is enjoying urban status since 1901. The Mandi palace popularly known as "Raj Mahal" as it looked in the past. The area where the "Sunken Garden" exists today was once a pond.
mandi is also known as  MINI PARIS, due to wide market of clothes and fashionable people.

Predecessors and short history
The predecessor state of Siokot was founded in 1527. Formerly part of the Kingdom of Suket in the Punjab Hills, the dynasty traditionally goes back to 765 AD. In about 1100, Vijaya Sen had two sons, Sahu Sen who ruled over Suket and Bahu Sen who ruled over Kullu. Bahu Sen's descendants emigrated to Kullu until the tenth descendant, Kabakha Sen was killed by the Raja of Kullu and his son had to flee to Siokot, not very far from the present city of Mandi which was founded during Ajbar Sen's rule. Since 1986, HH Raja Ashokpal has been the ruler.

After independence

Mandi District was formed by amalgamation of the erstwhile princely states of Mandi and Suket on the formation of Himachal Pradesh on 15 April 1948. Since then, it is serving as the district headquarters of the Mandi District.  Mandi district comprises 7 Tehsils namely Joginder Nagar, Sarkaghat, Sunder Nagar, Sadar Mandi, Chachyot, Thunag, Karsog and 9 Sub-Tehsils, i.e., Ladbharol, Padher, Sandhole, Dharmpur, Baldwara, Nihri, Kotli, Aut, Bali Chowki.
Municipal Council
Nagar Parishad Mandi was constituted during 1950. It has 13 wards consisting of 10 Revenue hadbasts.

Geography
Mandi is built on the banks of the Beas River, at the confluence of the Suketi Khad stream. Sikandar Dhar, Ghugar Dhar and Dhar Kot are some of the prominent hills and mountains found near the city. Mandi is located in 31°72'N latitude and 76°92'E longitude. It has an average elevation of 850 metres . It lies on the Midlands of the Himalayan range.
There is great variation in the climatic conditions of Himachal due to extreme variation in elevation. The climate varies from hot and sub-humid tropical in the southern tracts to cold, alpine and glacial in the northern and eastern mountain ranges with more elevation.

Geology
Mandi is a bowl shaped table land on the banks of river Beas, surrounded by the high hill ranges of Gandharv Hills, Motipur Dhar, Rehra Dhar and Tarna Hill. Two small rivulets, Suketi Khad and Skodhi Khad join River Beas. Besides, the table land on the banks of river/streams, terrain is steep and hilly. Geologically, the city is located in seismic Zone No. IV near a fault line and is prone to earthquakes. As National Highway-20 Pathankot-Mandi, National Highway-21 Chandigarh-Mandi-Manali, National Highway-70 Hoshiarpur-Mandi and State Highway-32 Hoshiarpur-Mandi passes through city, it is well connected with Jogindernagar, Palampur, Pathankot, Kullu, Sundernagar, Bilaspur, Chandigarh, Rewalsar and Una. Though Mandi is an old and fast developing city yet it still retains its original charm and character.

Climate
Mandi features a subtropical highland climate under the Köppen climate classification. The climate of Mandi is composite having hot summers and cold winters. Mandi generally experiences rainfalls during end of summer season. Mandi city falls in the lower most climatic zone of the Himalayas. These regions enjoys a Wet-sub temperate climate of the foothills  as against the Dry-cold alpine climate with snow fall at higher altitudes . Temperatures typically range from 6.7 °C  to 39.6 °C  over the course of a year. The average temperature during summer is between 18.9 °C  and 39.6 °C , and between 6.7 °C  and 26.2 °C  in winter. Monthly precipitation varies between 25.4 millimetres  in November to 228.6 millimetres  in August. It is typically around 58.3 millimetres  per month during winter and spring and around 101.6 millimetres  in June as the monsoon approaches. The average total annual precipitation is 832 millimetres .

Economy
Mandi is one of the fastest developing towns of Himachal Pradesh, located 
on cross junction of National Highway-20, 21 and 70. It acts as a gateway to Kullu, Lahaul, Leh
Ladakh, area of Jammu & Kashmir. Being District headquarters, the entire District depends upon the city for trade & commerce, services and civil administration. 
The economy of the region is predominately agrarian as around 79% of 
the total population is dependent on agriculture and activities allied to it, for earning their 
livelihood.

Government and politics
Established on 15 April 1948, the Mandi municipal council is the oldest elected body nominated by the government of Himachal Pradesh. Municipal Council of Mandi was constituted during 1950. It has 13 wards consisting of 10 Revenue Hadbasts. As of the 2017 general election, the two major political parties are the Bharatiya Janata Party   and the Indian National Congress  . The administrative head of the council is the Municipal commissioner who is appointed by the state government.

Transport
Local transport in Mandi is generally by auto-rickshaw, bus or private vehicles. Tourist taxis are also an option. The taxi station is located right in front of Seri Stage. Auto-rickshaws are the main means of transport in Mandi and are available almost 24 hours. 

Demographics
As of 2001 India census, City had a population of 26,858. Males constitute 53% of the population and females 47%. Mandi has an average literacy rate of 83.5%, higher than the national average of 65.38% & almost equal to state's literacy rate: male literacy is 92%, and female literacy is 75%. In Mandi, 11% of the population is under 6 years of age. Mandi had a very high sex ratio – 1013 girls for every 1000 boys in 2011. Mandi has a mixed population of Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists and Christians with more than 90% population being Hindu. According to census 2011, the city has a population of 26,422.

Culture
The people of Mandi are informally called Mandyalis. Mandeali language is generally used at local level for communication. Sepu Wadi is the official and main cuisine of Mandi. Dham is generally organised in local marriages, functions and parties. Himachal Darshan Photo Gallery is situated at about 4 km from Mandi near Sauli Khad on the Chandigarh-Manali National highway. This art gallery contains a collection of photographs of exotic locations of the entire state and reflects the social & cultural heritage of the people of Himachal Pradesh. District Library is located in Emerson House. Clothing in Mandi was Kurta-Pyjama for Boys and Sari-Suits for girls but with the Western Culture arriving to India, Mandi's youth have started wearing Western styles. However, there are still large numbers of people who wear the traditional clothing of Himachal Pradesh. Banthra is the main folk dance performed in theatrical shows in Mandi and is the official folk dance of the District.

Education
The city has anganwadis, primary schools as well as high schools. Some of the schools in the city include DAV Centenary Public School, Kendriya Vidyalaya, Mandi Public School, Indus World School, The Phoenix School of Integrated Learning, Vijay Government Senior Secondary School, Government Senior Secondary School, Sarswati Vidya Mandir nagwain., Sai Public School, St. Xavier Residential School, DAV Sr. Secondary School, Anglo Sanskrit Model School.
The medical institutes in Mandi is Himachal Dental College. Jawaharlal Nehru Government Engineering College, T. R. Abhilashi Memorial Institute of Engineering and Technology, and Vallabh Bhai Government College are also located in the city. The Indian Institute of Technology Mandi, is an autonomous and top university of the state for Graduation in B.Tech/M.Tech offering many courses.

Media
Mandi has numerous newspaper publications, television and radio stations. The top Hindi language newspapers are Dainik Bhaskar, Dainik Jagran, Amar Ujala, Punjab Kesari, Hindghosh. Magazines include Outlook, Champak. English language newspapers sold in Mandi include the Times of India, Mid-day, Hindustan Times, Indian Express, The Tribune.

Sports
Mandi is home to Bandy Federation of India which is a member of the IOC recognized Federation of International Bandy. Bandy Federation of India is Headquartered in Mandi. India has a bandy team. Bandy Federation of India takes care of Bandy in India. India is one of 7 countries in Asia and in total 29 to be a member of Federation of International Bandy.

Places of worship
Temples

Hydroelectric projects and ecological damage
Commissioning of Pandoh dam in 1977 diverted 9000 cusecs of Beas river reducing the flow through Mandi thereby adversely affecting the flora and fauna. The once mighty and roaring Beas now has a deserted look in the winter. The flow in Beas was further reduced in 1982 when additional waters were diverted from Uhl river in Barot to Shanan Power House. The citizen council of Mandi filed a writ petition that Pandoh dam release an extra 20 percent water to revitalize the river.

