Mandi district
X----XX----XX----XX----XX----XX----XX----XX----XX----XX----XX----XX----XX----XX----XX----X


History and geography
  Mandi district was formed after the merger of Mandi State  and Suket State, two princely states on 15 April 1948.

Lakes of Mandi district
  According to the 2011 census Mandi district has a population of 999,518, roughly equal to the nation of Fiji or the US state of Montana.

Demographics
  According to the 2011 census Mandi district has a population of 999,518, roughly equal to the nation of Fiji or the US state of Montana.

Subdivisions
  It is near Kullu-Manali, around 80 km from Bhunter Airport, 90 km from Kullu and 67 km from Mandi. It hosts Himachal Cultural Village, an ethnic village highlighting the culture of Himachal Pradesh.

General information
  The historic town of Mandi  is built along the banks of the river Beas. This one-time capital of the princely state of Mandi is a fast developing town that retains much of its original charm and character.

Approach
  The historic town of Mandi  is built along the banks of the river Beas. This one-time capital of the princely state of Mandi is a fast developing town that retains much of its original charm and character.

Places of interest
  The historic town of Mandi  is built along the banks of the river Beas. This one-time capital of the princely state of Mandi is a fast developing town that retains much of its original charm and character.

Dev Balakameshwar Temple
  All the faith of the local people is vested in these local gods called ‘devta’ in the regional language.Some of the deities and their characteristics that distinguish them from each other are discussed below-
Dev Balakameshwar temple is 13 km from Mandi and located in its very heart, Practically synonymous with Mandi located in its very heart Dev Balakameshwar Temple, located in village & po tikkar.

Bhootnath Temple
 

Rewalsar Lake
  About 25 km from Mandi, 14 km from Ner Chowk is the Rewalsar lake, famous for its floating islands of reed. Lying in a mountain hollow, the lake is held sacred to all three communities; boating facilities are available.

Prashar Lake
  Prashar Lake lies 49 km north of Mandi, with a three-storied pagoda-like temple dedicated to the sage Prashar.

Joginder Nagar
 

Sundar Nagar
  Famous for its temples, 26 km from Mandi towards Shimla and at a height of 1,174 metres on the raised edge of a fertile valley, the town of Sundar Nagar is known for its shady walks amidst towering trees.

Janjehli
  At a distance of 80 km from Mandi, Janjehli is a paradise for hikers, offering treks up to a height of 3,300 metres. It takes about 3 hours to reach here from Mandi via Baggi, Chail Chowk and Thunag . In the midst of thick forest, forests  is Bajahi.  Janlehli is popular for adventure activities like-trekking, night safari, mountaineering, and skiing.

Barot
  The road to Barot branches off at Jogindernagar-Mandi high ways and from Jogindernagar the distance is 40 km. The remains of the summer palace of the former rulers of Mandi are located here.Through the little village of Tikkan, the road carries on to Barot.

Kotli
  Famous temples are Shiv temple Kotli, Racehra dev temple kotli at Racehra hill, Janitri devi Temple at Janitri Hill, Jhagru Dev Temple, Kasla dev and kamrawh dev temple kotli, surgani devi temple, Mahan Dev temple, Tej bahadur singh Temple, tarokda wali devi temple, and Nagni devi temple.

Dharmpur
   At a distance of 68 kilometers from Mandi on  Dharmpur is a sub-tehsil of Mandi district. It is mainly famous for temple of Baba Kamlahia, Jalpa Mata and 'Kandhapattan' famous for crematorium are located in Dharmpur sub-division.

Education
  The district is home to the Bandy Federation of India which is a member of the IOC recognized Federation of International Bandy.

Universities and colleges
  The district is home to the Bandy Federation of India which is a member of the IOC recognized Federation of International Bandy.
